... >2
< ...
the poet's only theme is ``I.''
In stead of happiness, say I,
  O Russia!
Friends of my Ruslan and Lyudmila,
in Adam Smith was his diploma;
and melancholy as Svetlana,2
album and stays, Princess Alina,
``Akulka'' the onetime Selina,
Praskovya re-baptized ``Polina'';
and, in the district, this persona
the Neva.''
it was goodbye, Monsieur l'Abbé.

and slowly day begins to climb.
presses its forebears to the tomb.
but I, in love, was dull and dumb.
and telling trochee from iambic
that world where every man's a critic
boo Phaedra out as paralytic,
Now, Lensky, would it be so bad
to life grew colder than the dead.
of entertaining the half-dead:
they rise and ripen and fall dead:
The happiness of youth is dead,
the ballroom drove me off my head:
on the dull life that bachelors lead;
just like, on turf, your fleeting tread.

others will follow where they tread...
to blow his brains out, but in stead
His wife, just like Tatyana, had
on Richardson gone raving mad.
to drive the swooning senses mad;
with amber pipes from Tsaregrad;12
you're really going? Well, I'm sad.
one smoothes the pillows down in bed,
take any novel, clearly traced
At first Onegin's tongue produced
loved someone else, not her intended,
High ceilings everywhere abounded;

in the saloon, brocade-surrounded,
Her father, kindly, well-regarded,
but in an earlier age retarded,
Eugene, with solemn face, paid heed,
touches obliquely, but with speed,
for his old courses to be changed.
and glad he was he'd thus arranged
have other maidens, since you vanished,
my little feet, where have you vanished,
people there were he glorified,
he's dreadfully dissatisfied;
she lacked her sister's beauty, lacked
you left no steps that could be tracked:
fever of rhyme: thereby he's doubled

the pangs with which his heart was troubled,
His hair was fashionably curled,
her feelings were far more inclined --
is in your poetry enshrined?''
and where most surely notes are sped.
her girlhood games; in them he'd shared,
on Olga; from heart's ache still spared,
Her tender touch had never fingered
the needle, never had she lingered
reader, or where you've shone and glittered!
Onegin, my good friend, was littered
deep in Moldavia the abhorred,

our lives were flat, and what had fired
both hearts to blaze had now expired;
far, far from Italy, his adored.
and not because she'd once preferred
the silence when our talk had ceased!
Like convicts in a dream released
hold half the world still unreleased,
Unforced, as conversation passed,
with whom your thoughts are so obsessed --
a haze in me, but I grew used
to which so oft we've dedicated
she fell in love -- the hour was fated...
they buried Uncle, congregated

its nullity I've always hated,
Lensky ingenuously related
on waves of far niente floated,
to eat and drink, then separated
his tale of youthful love, narrated
the thought sank in, and penetrated:
of secret pain... but it's now rated
as infant sleep, or the unaffected
his bow was wholly unaffected.
his strangeness, wholly unaffected,
In French Onegin had perfected
which held him silently subjected,
the crown of marriage was projected
the noise their rustic wheels projected --

she'd never join the game selected,
of light that flowering fields reflected:
a park, enormous and neglected,
Whenever nyanya had collected
before Onegin there collected
His father died; and (as expected)
once on the highway he'd detected
by deep and shady woods protected;
his soul still blossomed out, and lighted
she grew accustomed, and contented.
in tears and violent tossing vented
sadly he mourned for the departed.


instead the chance to get acquainted
with tenderness he'd watched and noted
To harmless idleness devoted,
From that rough spell at last exempted,
``Poor Yorick,'' said he, broken-hearted:
treaties of nations long departed,
but soon the ways we trod were parted
but, without asking, they transported
Eugene turned countryman. He tasted
till then had been dispersed and wasted --
with grave goodbyes to the bereaved,
the strophe over which I slaved;
had long been wasting and enslaved
by pain and languishment; she craved
for maybe fortune will have saved
as if some goal had been achieved.
sweet old tradition was preserved:
Russian pancakes were always served;
a stride on Petrarch's path, allayed
the murmur where the streamlet played...
a masculine disguise to aid
stumblingly call to mind he did
this Grandison of hers was splendid,
two verses of the Aeneid.
Still in the porch, exhausted-stupid,
on springtime grasses of the field,
under the table's linen shield,
from her Monsieur took on the child.

He was sweet-natured, and yet wild.
the ancients have gone stiff and cold,
the moderns rage against the old.
and now at last he saw the World.
spying my features, as he could,
of calculated slander should,
already stirred him as they should.
for quite a while by fortune's hand.
I feel a small foot in my hand;
sometimes, in reverie's sacred land,
and took a mortgage on his land.
with me to see an alien strand;
His father failed to understand

interior décor in the end
But you, blest husbands, to the end
and give her comfort to the end:
you kept your friendship with our friend:
``Boredom, that's what so bad, my friend.''
I don't know why, but for my friend
give me the homely hearth, and lend...''
of mind got clarity new-found;
emotion, thought, and magic sound;
perfervid language of the bard,
and always the inspired regard --
Eugene attends the boulevard,
and everything is cramped and loud;

in grief that nothing else could mend;
custom is despot of mankind.
someone towards whose heart and mind
can yet keep nail-care much in mind:
rewards the music of your mind
pursue his love -- and at one bound
a corpse on boards was all he found,
was quite beyond his wit, we found.
Istómina,11 thronged all around
spread out its shadow all around --
by Naiads, one foot on the ground,
but in the old days she had heard

the tolerant Evgeny heard --
an offering ready for the ground.
the pensive Dryads' hiding-ground.
from Million Street16 came floating round;
and then a drozhky's clopping sound
frenzy which wrecks our lives for sound,
and listen for the heart's first sound,
honest devotion to the good,
Farewell the games of golden childhood!
he fell in love with darkest wildwood,
if I, like you, had been a bard.
which Ovid sang, for which the bard,
on jam, and speeches in regard
Olga's no life in her regard:

condemned to a lifetime of hard,

to rains, and flax, and the stockyard.''
but scarcely understood a word.
while a mazurka holds the crowd;
To private tastes we each subscribe:
the usurers' voracious tribe.
old Uncle's end was soon to be.
swam on the river's dreaming face,
but in his songs kept pride of place
and then, with an enchanting grace,
fortunate one, he'd not disgrace;
   Horace
The bitterness was mine -- the ice
he'd pop the poison in his chalice!
was his; we'd both drunk passion's chalice:
there waited for us both the malice
what traps he'd set him, with what malice
girls' albums, signed in blood for choice;
encore Moëna,7 -- and rejoice
conversing in a singsong voice;
to know the audience hears his voice.
of recompense beyond endurance,
It fascinates by its assurance
< that there existed, for the indulgence
with irresistible refulgence,
here's boredom, madness or pretence,
the coolness of the sombre glade,
poetry's sacred frenzy, made

her progress at the masquerade.
and felt himself love's invalide.
there gathered at the coffin-side
feelings he valued -- from outside.
to gentlemen on every side
of every funeral far and wide;
who can combine it with the free
now sensitive, and now carefree,
at feasts, was strong and fancy-free?
Chapter Three
or else, from far off, he could see
kept asking: "shall I live to see"...''
at first, with God knows whom to see,
the peaceful Muses' devotee,
and hate with malice; he whose life
and dutifully shared his life
always contented with his life,
far more than most who leave this life.
just like a shadow, or a wife.
is yawned away with friends and wife
his children and his faithful wife,
and with his dinner, and his wife.
as I recall a bygone age?
good-looking, in the flower of age,
when not quite eighteen years of age.
all this, at eighteen years of age,

Faublas'3 disciple for an age --
he sang of lifetime's yellowed page --
or novelties from fashion's page.
a poet, and a Kantian sage.
adorned the sanctum of our sage.
as was the old suspicious sage,
and yawn in silence at the stage
not even in her earliest age;
where he was master of his college,
where the prize-boy of fashion's college
but I refuse to chop or change.
across the Baltic in exchange
for wood and tallow; all the range
took her to his estate, where she,

The censor's tribute, I'll arrange:
of love's anxiety. Blessed is he
Was it to no effect that he,
I roam by the secluded lake.
And every morning I awake
a pretty girl exactly like
relations off, and never spoke.
they took offence at this, and broke
with this the hero of my tale:
such crystalled scents as best are able
the charge that poets are unable
two cupboards, one divan, a table,
put back the libel on the table
Oak-floored, and simple as a stable:

they needed kvas like air; at table
When out to burst a rival's bubble,
of jealousy, to seem to tremble
his epigrams topped up with bile.
The evening passes, and meanwhile
and for a chuckle or a smile.
already tends too much to smile
his virulence that made you smile,
befitting such a noble pile:
But God, how deadly dull to sample
Let others learn from his example!
12 Constantinople.
and set off prompter than a whistle
Evgeny read the sad epistle
and glumly serves the medicine bottle,
And the sly baseness, fit to throttle,
that even so my wretched style
in sensible old-fashioned style.
Was it for you that I became
The fields are dark, since evening came.
that there be just one voice which came,
long since unstirred by praise and fame
earn for me the rewards of fame --
become a joke to us, its game,
to do them all is easy game.
misunderstanding, noise, and blame!
which I myself won't praise or blame

and theirs was the poetic flame
of calm and reason, when the flame
In languid silence, or the flame
a novel graced with such a name.
like a true friend, to speak my name.
since I'm a member of the same.
that fired his soul, to burn the same;
new depths of boredom.'' ``No, the same.
of eloquence, and just the same
self-willed it may be just the same;
Which one comes first? It's just the same
peopled my sleep, and to their theme
to pass the time was Eugene's theme:
felicitously every theme,

of listening like a judge-supreme
to institute a new regime.
until Bréguet's unsleeping chime
no beauties of a foreign clime,
of something vague, some misty clime;
that stretched from Romulus in his prime
Yet sweeter far, at such a time,
He sang of grief and parting-time,
across the years to our own time.
no noise of gaiety, no time
In winter, when for longer time
advises him of dinner-time.

from ball to bed behold him come;

and, with it, forced renown to come --
He destined Olga's hand for me,
whose memory will preserve for me
the strain of Tasso's octave-rhyme!
ensconced beside the window-pane.
that king of the satiric scene,
and wore his dressing-gown to dine.
left her to follow her own line,
won't benefit these guts of mine.''
youth's choice, the flower of French cuisine:
I'm much afraid that bilberry wine
her soul was waiting... for someone.
for unmeant kindness -- how he shone!
in deepest grasses, quite alone,
the units are ourselves alone.
taken your place, though not your throne?
Parisian taste invents for one --
lend ears to my lugubrious tone:
his song was limpid in its tune
consequences of hideous woe;
when shall I start on my escape?
It's time to drop astern the shape
its natural right to rave and flare.
youth is a fever; we must spare
Monsieur l'Abbé, the mediocre,
folly for me to interfere

the country's pretty stupid here!
how bold or bashful there, and here
and cattle roamed the plain, and here
he saw that, as in cities, here
beneath the stone reposes here,
with young Semyónova,9 and there
then suddenly she's off, and there
three pairs of handsome ones -- yet there
this soul that glowed with virgin fire.
poetic dreams, a brighter fire.
No, never in the hottest fire
have each asked him to a soirée:
they don't deserve what they inspire
of boiling youth did I desire
nothing could alter or could tire
I could describe here his attire;
to hear what latest modes require,
6 Gentleman, squire.
the highest circles are a bore.
they'd settled that some years before.
what it's transported to our shore
is dressed, undressed, and dressed once more?
is mincing manners -- nothing more.
Of Lensky's fate they said no more --
self-portraits only -- furthermore
you were the first ones he forswore;
   Malfilâtre


I regularly take much pleasure
there any friend of harmless pleasure
the secret of her husband's measure,
she found, in labours and in leisure,
it touched with reverie her leisure,
that, meanwhile, pinched and glum of feature,
and country stillness: there the lyre
enough of my loquacious lyre:
on stage are thumping without cease;
impart such lessons as you please!
then afterwards, alone, at ease,
sits with Limburg's vivacious cheese
I never lived or wrote for praise;
yet how I wish that I might raise

his mind, so cold and so precise.
forty years long would criticise
for she was bored by laughs and noise
and he was bored with social noise;
or, with an epigram-surprise,
here there's no conscience, here no sense;
That's when I'll sit down to compose
when we begin to talk of verse);
the horses fidget worse and worse;
even in our names (and how much worse
the coachmen ring the fire, and curse
by the cold world's corrupt finesse;
would be allied to him by fate;


drew scrutiny no less complete --
proficiency to speak and write,
with any torture so exquisite
beside unfinished lines, a suite
he stalked the drawing-rooms, remote
in Russia among the common people.'' Pushkin's note.
4 ``Well-known restaurateur.'' Pushkin's note.
Pushkin's note.
from Boston's cloth or gossip's quote;
yes, focus on them your lorgnette,
that all of Russia can't contribute
one pair! I pay them memory's tribute
to the first meanings of his flute.
but now it bores me every minute.
reflection or provoked dispute:
and stoves with tiles of various hue.
promptly had nothing left to give.
had only debts on which to live.
why fight what's known to be decisive?
recalling earlier loves, did we,
penates, came to cast an eye
homestead, before her parents' gaze,
we were swept off, in reverie's haze,
with Eugene proved a tempting prize.
yet, truthfully and not in chaff,
at Cleopatra, hiss her off,
each in tumultuous turn descending


upon the side of the distaff --
who'll clap an entrechat, or scoff
4 Serfs chosen as recruits for the army had their forelock cut off.
now even Didelot's tedious stuff.''
that was less clever still by half.
he never took one from the shelf,
and leant upon the granite shelf;
could see no harm in books; himself
just as the Poet15 paints himself.
15 A mocking  reference to Mikhail  Muraviev's poem ``To the Goddess of
where in the heart of silence rang
of many distant lands he sang
He sweetened up with fancy's icing
was still mysterious and enticing --

Dressed like -- --,14 duly dreading
the barbs that envy's always spreading,
his collar in its beaver braiding
Whatever for caprice of spending
ingenious London has been sending
has voices that are more resounding,
came distant horns, and gallant singing.
and then a boat, with oars a-swinging,
its echoes, its belated urging,
its wayward tricks, its violent surging,
that queen of secrets and of sighing.
inspires your lute to sounds of sighing?
Silence was everywhere enthralling;


his life till dawn's already making,
Then, after midday he'll be waking;
the merchant's up, the cabman's walking
spurs of Chevalier Gardes are clinking,
incendiary looks are slinking,
such is the usual country cooking;
towards his stall, the pedlar's hawking;
fancies once more are hotly bubbling,
once more that touch is fiercely troubling
hate, love, joy, sorrow -- every feeling,
just sentries to each other calling,
he struggled to bite back the chilling
tribute of tears, applause's shrilling,
to Eugene all was new and thrilling;
there сzerov8 shared the unwilling

so pure, so spotless through and through,
but by and large their talk's a hash
of the most harmless, hopeless trash.
some ladies preach from Say and Bentham,
It's true, I'll not misrepresent them,
``My uncle -- high ideals inspire him;
at once they give a man the spleen.
so virtuous that, no sooner seen,
her heart had long been overrun:
so pious, and so clever too,
And what's more, they're so supercilious,
so circumspect, and so punctilious,


no, not for long were belles the ruling
So, like Childe Harold, glum, unpleasing,
no glance so sweet, no sigh so teasing,
a great attraction to conversing.
to his disputing and his cursing;
and when its waters were not showing,
and some were even testifying
soon, infidelity proved cloying,
and friends and friendship, soul-destroying;
that modish rings were still a-buying.
and sighs, and asks oneself all through:
a seedling fallen in the earth.
so fires of spring will bring to birth
in taffeta of mourning black.
and hid the bookshelf's dusty stack
and never played a shrewder trick.
but when past joking he fell sick,
of other's thought -- a splendid goal;
his Strasbourg pie, or point a moral,
and though he liked a fiery quarrel --
of work made him feel sick, and still
no word came flowing from his quill;
he stood there, pensive and forgetful,
oppressed by emptiness of soul,
I liked his quality, the dream
retired, as he, from fashion's stream,
he really forced one to admire him --

claiming Tatyana'd found her man;
and jokes and spiteful gossip ran
locked himself up inside his den
in lives that were just dawning then.
of blind Fortuna and of men
and with a yawn took up his pen,
something like spleen, that scourge of Britain,
days that are lost behind the curtain,
he failed to join that sharp profession
the fateful diet; by depression
and tried to write, but a hard session
Her feelings in their weary session
it mastered him in slow gradation;
he strove to achieve the appropriation
in indescribable elation,
thank God, he had no inclination
he read, and read -- no satisfaction:
with shelves of books deployed for action,
for him all sham has found rejection,
he's gnawed by serpent Recollection,
drink in the midnight benediction,
from gaol to greenwood, by such fiction
I was Onegin's friend that season.
not every day could he wash down
his beefsteak with champagne, or drown
punctilious in his cotton cap,
has opened up his serving-trap.

and more than once the German baker,

there was a general furtive chatter,
Conjecture found unending matter:
with brilliant conquests by the shower,
his freedom, in his youth's first flower,
by drozhkies jaunting at full power
no, nothing caused his heart to stir,
and nothing pierced his senses' blur.
he sleeps, away from glare and glamour,
on most occasions between friends,
and by Repentance. All this lends,
recalling earlier time's romances,
to the beginning of our days.

in their gay glass, the borrowed light
of Dian's visage, in our fancies
to scorn the men with whom he deals;
ghostlike, must trouble him who feels --
they're all chained up in different fetters,
He'd given up girls -- now gave up letters,
objective of his thoughts and joys:
but held up by the simple fact
the marriage plans were all exact
blue smoke of chimneys goes aloft,
this child of luxury and delight.
converting morning to midnight,
by Neva, on a summer night,

should have been analysed when caught,
and there at large he goes patrolling
Meanwhile, attired for morning strolling
it's easy, without too much fooling,
one customary object gleaming,
perpetually, one goal for dreaming,
when Bréguet's chime is heard proclaiming
of gossip, and set comment humming
of innocence: a lily blooming
Away inside that unassuming
my thoughtless pen has stopped designing,
I write, my heart has ceased its pining,
and so, before the world of learning,
He'd brought back all the fruits of learning
devoted to the Muse, or learning,
earth's rim grows light, and a forewarning
whisper of breeze announces morning,
a spirit strange, a spirit burning,
no years of absence past returning,
the shades of night within their keeping
with lines to mark where they were sleeping...
is softly, indolently sleeping,
still coughing, hissing, clapping, champing;
the audience still is busy stamping,
and though to do so would be daring,
it's my profession; he was wearing --
for grumbling, gossiping and swearing
here's tea that Olga's been preparing;
gripped him no more; soon they were raising

I longed, like every breaker hissing,
to smother her dear feet with kissing.
but ladies' hands are not for kissing;
``The man's a boor; his brain is missing,
while Petersburg's already rousing,
meantime she'd give the maids a beating
Mushrooms in brine, for winter eating,
He's flown to Talon's,4 calculating
and thus our race, so fluctuating,
the gallery claps -- it's bored with waiting --
We too shall find our hour is waiting;
that there his friend Kavérin's5 waiting;
Three whole hours, at the least accounting,
giddy as Venus when she's mounting
untouched by envy's bitter smarting,
he who has cooled down love with parting,
he had the talent of saluting
while serious topics were disputing,
that from the backdoor he'd be leaving
with combs, and steel utensils serving
as files, and scissors straight and curving,
and band already tired of blowing,
roses romantically blowing;
his sobs, where his live tears were flowing;
and entered. Ballroom overflowing...
will in my soul be hushed and dying.

Uncle, in bed, and near to dying,
dead ash sets no more sparks a-flying;
through heaven's expanse serenely flying,
and captive girls, by Salgir20 lying.
and radiate a rainbow: blazing
shadows that flit behind the glazing
the third day, wood and hill and grazing
shows freedom's advocate, that strong
champion of rights, as in the wrong.
and take due warning from my speech.
now pay attention, I beseech,
the Russian N, like N in French;
soon all that went without a wrench:
the tongue of love and of Petrarch.
was asked around as quite a catch --
and all the neighbours planned a match
both set him yawning just as much.
once I too liked it very much;
a portrait with a charming touch;
a modish taste, a dowdy touch --
my Africa,18 where waves break high,
custom's bestowed us from on high.
and offer to that ash a sigh;
he turns away: ``I've had enough --
with deep emotion through and through,
and scorned his fellows through and through,
is finished, and I've looked it through

the meaning of an epigraph,
Lensky composed in autograph
a madrigal for epitaph.
fades from the view, and in the hush
of waiting for the dawn to blush,
accounts, shaved forelocks,4 Sunday bath;
fieldwork directed from the path,
and raven curls of shoulder-length.
an eloquence of fevered strength,
of neighbouring owners of the earth --
fragments of poems from the North,
but I'm allergic to the North...1
There once I too strolled back and forth:
the abstracted poet would bring forth
only to Eugene showed their worth;
Pushkin's poem The Fountain of Bakhchisarai.
but all concurred that, truth to speak,
he was a menace, and a freak.
the other, jugs of applejack,
fruit liqueurs and an Almanack
but pantaloons, waistcoat, and frock,
these words are not of Russian stock:
any Madonna by Van Dyck:
the flaming roses of a cheek,
to kiss Armida's lips, or seek
their guests, for all they ate and drank,
were served in order of their rank.
where you were born as well, I think,

but meanwhile let him live, and think
and bred upon the Neva's brink,
So now be off to Neva's brink,
even without me it will sink;
fruits of my labour and my ink...
at any other sort of book.
at the Academic Diction-book.
Tatyana had a changeling look
though years ago I used to look
had left the squire no time to look
was an enchanting country nook:
would bless the form his fortune took.
in her own home. She never took
and then a stroll in Letny Park.

from her my lips will learn and mark
a mild rebuke was his worst mark,
she'd never tell them news or scandal
the mountain maiden,19 my ideal,
my carefree song would thus reveal
7 Heroine of Ozerov's tragedy Fingal.
over his neighbour's plain memorial,
be doomed to feel it: there's one goal
then from the Muse there came revival:
my soul in secret gave survival;
the subtle spouse was just as loyal --
and the majestic, antlered royal,
dear ladies' feet fly past like hail,

``it's time!'' and freedom hears my hail.
let me acquaint you on the nail
and on their captivating trail
I signal to each passing sail.
we'd better hasten to the ball,
I have no leisure to recall;
she quite forgot -- began to call
I know it, in the thoughts of all
the art he'd studied best of all,
are old times, and the servants' hall.
sentiment, notebook, verses, all
Onegin has outrun us all.
from the agent, with this tale to tell:
to tales that young moustachios tell.
wished him to come and say farewell.
in his small shack, will listen well
and sat down by the window-sill.''
empire, and fled it; happier still
``She was the one who looked as still
Princess Alina. She was still
engaged then -- but against her will;
is he who's never felt its will,
in play with her obedient doll
of raging passion's surge and roll
the world's éclat, its thunder-roll,
the child prepares for protocol --
for them, in Butterweek5 the greaseful,
wild as a forest deer, and fearful,

Shy as a savage, silent, tearful,
Happy is he who's known its fretful
with sighs unconsciously regretful.
is known today; only a soul
still captivated his young soul.
ever so roughly rocked my soul!
freedom's enthusiastic dream,
adore the love that comes in dream.
O Brenta, I'll see you in dream;
the magic voices of your stream,
from German realms of mist and steam,
Schiller and Goethe had refined him,
and thoughts of her were what inspired him
He roamed the world, his lyre behind him;
dared clean his nails in front of him,
he's a freemason too; for him,
red wine in tumblers to the brim --
of evening, and those tears, the balm
those walks amid the gloom and calm
could not conceive how solemn Grimm13
grows, surges, boils, for lack of room
16  Millyonaya, a street  parallel to the Neva, and one block away from

untirable, at sound of drum:
and feel once more emotion's ban.

19 Refers  to the  Circassian girl  in  Pushkin's  poem  The  Caucasian

between their girls and this half-Russian.
So a disabled soldier-man,
and truffles, which have ever been
on a small table's oilcloth sheen
the jug of bilberry wine is seen.1
immortals picked by fate for when,
of human friendship, holy men,
flown like an arrow, then he's given
about them -- nineteen to the dozen --
of virgin fancy, and again
we sometimes like to hear again
the charm of what was grave and plain.
in silence all day she'd remain
reduced to sense, not without pain --
To whom do you, from all the train
of jealous girls, devote its strain?
with comedies of swarm and din;
there caustic Shakhovskóy8 came in
through it they're known to me, and kin.
on kennels, and on kith and kin,
5 Hussar and friend of Pushkin.
2 Lines discarded by Pushkin.
11 Ballerina, once courted by Pushkin.
2 Stanzas IX, XIII, XIV, XXXIX, XL and XLI were omitted by Pushkin.
Italian nights, when I'll drink in
``A humble sinner, Dimitry Larin,
He was a good and simple barin;6
7 Fortress captured from the Turks in 1788.

20 River  in  the  Crimea.  The  reference  is to  the  harem  girls in
so often from her Moscow cousin
on liquor, and on hay brought in,
and the derivative Knyazhnín:8
on a fast stallion from the Don,
swaying the artless, waiting on
of hope and gloom, romantic-fashion,
he's seen it all; with looks and fashion
ended his wild career of fashion
But, now I've praised the queens of fashion,
All this has now gone out of fashion,
Fonvizin8 sparkled, freedom's champion,
which, listening with some condescension,
they all have richly earned a pension;''
In the white heat of some dissension
excited not a hint of passion:
in terms of poetry or passion --
this was the science of that passion
he's viewed the boxes without passion,
when, in pale sky, the stars' procession
in casual letters of confession --
As, lovingly, in his confession,
the poet's heart found full expression,
A thinker in a desert mission,
As soon as he appears, discussion
your molten gold, your charmed infusion;

The manor house, in deep seclusion,
I'll float in gondola's seclusion;
screened by a hill from storm's intrusion,
the millions of two-legged creation
the fleeting works of my creation,
Evgeny, hating litigation,
that corps of social legislation --
so, full of heart-felt tribulation,
secure a secret assignation,
Sign of the urge for domination:
I know (and seek your exculpation)
then he'd implore a declaration,
Napoleon's our sole inspiration;
hear, once more filled with inspiration,
bitter-sweet glory's inspiration,
of his Ochákov7 decoration!
with fond caress? whose adoration
it had no sparkle of sensation,
and logic; yet the conversation
this was our heroes' conversation
trusted her without hesitation,
on words of foreign derivation,
finding in that no deprivation --
I thank him without reservation,
of childish pranks: a chilled reaction
the brilliant crackpot: this reaction
with such a blissful, brief infection --

Rousseau (forgive a short distraction)
Tatyana never knew the attraction
In time past, objects of affection
I grasp a stirrup with affection,
the universe is all perfection;
He lacked the slightest predilection
but groomed an anecdote-collection
Meanwhile my novel's opening section
there's far too much of contradiction,
meticulously; in my fiction
it stood, defiant of destruction
How soft his glance, or at discretion
he changed the corvée of tradition
Fate saved Evgeny from perdition:
and yet a distant admonition
I'm blind to every apparition;
at first Madame gave him tuition,
and then it's tea that comes to mention,
he's bowed politely; his attention
and whisper ``Dunya, pay attention!''
More tolerant in his conception
yet, as each rule has its exception,
thoughts of a girl, or as the moon
the roundest face that you've set eyes on,
invariably, as time went on,
a dumb moon, on a dumb horizon.''
my disillusioned glass, and yearn,
became their scrutiny's concern.

of fate, and life, each in its turn
that alien scene must I now turn
for friends of languor, or of fun,
for Olga, on the spreading lawn,
her little friends, Tatyana'd yawn,
till he at last was summoned down
whose kindly hand will ruffle down
sleep much, read little, and put down
the thought of volatile renown.
to bee and butterfly unknown.
and once again received a crown.
her to the altar and the crown.
the laurel in the old man's crown!
can't really be: for we've outgrown
the latest fashions of the town;
blooms when there's nothing else to do.
since I stopped sinning years ago.
as fast as post-horses could go,
bed-time, and time for guests to go.
see with their jugs the milk-girls go
a frequent question: ``tell me who
with a Venetian maiden who
it will be our descendants who
thought them a pointless peccadillo;
sacred to children of Apollo!
or pine, persuade of yes or no,
the hero's name's decided too.

out of this world will crowd us too.
can chatter, and be silent too,
after that, supper's served, and so
they were her only food... and so
his conscience's record, and so
``This time I think you've been reduced to
``You yawn, Onegin?'' ``As I'm used to.''
Chapter Two
a quilted chamber-robe and cap.
and introduced, for the last lap,
land where my heart is buried deep.
the heartache that they bring lies deep.
though cold I am and sad; in sleep
land where I learned to love and weep,
by judgement of the modern camp
almost as good as a dim lamp.
a plain, unceremonious troop,
wine of the Comet6 fills the cup;
their hand to grapple slander's cup,
he arrives -- the cork goes flying up,
neighbours and friends in kindly group,
in his defence, and smash it up;
our friend Katénin8 brought to bear
oh, à propos: Larin's a dear
as gay as morning and as clear,
and soon they bring her... a guitar

sweet as a lover's kiss, and dear,
an urge to sleep; soon, clear as clear,
villages flickered far and near,
how brilliant with its instant tear!
complete with broad-brimmed bolivar,
and Dunya works the samovar;
myself and Eugene, lest a reader
of mocking turn, or else a breeder
in winter, on the cast-iron fender,
My love for it is just as tender,
word on his lips, and thought: it's sheer
some future dunce will point a finger
perhaps -- for flattering hope will linger --
soon a great truth came to enfold her
bound where the magic bow will send her,
The city's early sounds awake her;
10 Dancer and choreographer.
I walk the shore,17 I watch the weather,
His life went sailing in calm weather;
still shivering in the bitter weather
No ice and flame, no stormy weather
to kissing or caressing father
He gave three balls a year, and rather
she never joined, or skipped, but rather
So, verse and prose, they came together.
Lovelace, or Grandison, or neither;
without preliminary feeler

now free, I once more weave together
their lords, and thwack their palms together;
sometimes the evening brought together
rendered them tedious to each other;
``You pile one eclogue on another!
became like brother knit to brother.
for God's sake, that will do. But, brother,
servant of God, and Brigadier.''
Drive on, Andryushka! quicker, quicker!
No moralizing from this joker;
He cursed Theocritus and Homer,
exercised, under lucre's banner,
of passion's out, and its whole manner
he fed on hope's deceptive dinner;
I'll feed the journalists for dinner
In heart's affairs, a sweet beginner,
you newborn work, and like a winner
Prisoner.
it frankly, I'm a firm adorer
Eugene was free, and as a dresser
was Göttingen, his alma mater,
``The one you love's the younger daughter?''
``Why not?'' ``I'd choose the other quarter
he fled from their resounding chatter!
Their talk, so sound on every matter,
make Juvenal his text, or better
from drowning's death in Lethe river

add vale when he signed a letter;
Present me, please.'' ``You're joking.'' ``Never.''
that raves with poetry can ever
Russia's Terpsichore, shall never
your chorus, is it dead for ever?
for me to glimpse this Phyllis ever
not separation's chilling power,
she's up and flying through the air
a deft arrangement to his hair,
exists for me one special pair!
in, past concierge, up marble stair
it's yes or no, but never sir.''
but, when he'd rushed to Uncle's manor,
the linen stretched on the tambour.

the cabinet behind the door
made London's dandy his professor.
Vladimir Lensky, whose creator
He's off -- this ruthless legislator
for the footlights, this fickle traitor
simple old lady; but the liquor --
The vote was passed without demur.
Then with a half-ethereal splendour,
are treated to the fullest rigour
one customary grief each hour!
to liven with a silk atour
of the dull shores of my disfavour,
Onegin knew enough to savour

to mourn for Russia's gloomy savour,
3 Hero of Louvet's novel about betrayed husbands.
and neighbours, followed the same ends.
for them by fathers who, as friends
on this unstable life, my friends!
I know too surely how it ends.
mills, lands and waters -- he whose goods
the total ownership of woods,
no mansions, no ballrooms, no bards.
a fop, a punter on the cards,
although there are no streets, no cards,
and junior Ensign in the Guards.
to all the most adored actrices,
and ananas, the gold of trees.
the prejudices of the ages,
the secrets of the grave, the pages
the jams appear in little dishes;
The protocol is all one wishes:
she fell in love with all the fancies
look through the pane, and squash the flies.
8 Playwrights of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
by any itch for marriage ties;
brushes on thirty different scales;
twirls the other slowly as she pleases,
frightening with all despair's disguises,
straight to his stall, then turns his glasses
in Olga everything expresses --

the skyblue eyes, the flaxen tresses,
the footmen sleep on the pelisses;
this denizen of the coulisses
Along the fronts of darkened houses,
What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
along the street where slumber drowses,
the thoughts of my two anchorites.
to lie down at her feet like slaves!
how envious was I of the waves
while roar of violins contrives
to drown the hiss of modish wives.
of kindling smiles in ladies' eyes.
like fluff before Aeolian breezes;
their breed would (some years after this)
that ardent youth entirely lacks;
it blabs, and spills them in its tracks.
haphazard; so, to God be thanks,
to pass for cultured in our ranks.
into the tomb's wide open portals,
brushes for teeth, brushes for nails.
``Come to me in my golden halls.''
the boxes; boiling, pit and stalls;
feeling is quaint, and fit for fools.
for us are instruments and tools;
then, help me God, she caterwauls:
and up the rustling curtain crawls.
the funeral monument explains:

above the dust of his remains

And of the cupboards, one contains
no trace of ink, no spots, no stains.
the Muses' lofty arts and fashions,
for the sublime, and for the passions
it led him, in these early sessions,
for 1808: his obligations
the legatee of his relations --
a book of household calculations,
the safest place for declarations,
old prejudice; all men are zeros,
an ode in twenty-five cantos.
of ladies and of freakish fops.
project in silhouette the tops
and soon, oh soon the storm's arrears
I'm grieving still, but no more tears,
across the public's toes; he steers
retired, forgotten by his brothers,
passion's rough language talked by others,
on unknown ladies in the tiers;
what occupied his chafing powers
Just before dinner, from his labours
he rested -- wept for by his neighbours,
throughout the boredom of the hours --
he'll spend before the looking-glass,
then from his cabinet he'll pass
I love their feet -- though I confess

in fact a thorough fop, no less.
the crush, the glitter and the gladness,
the atmosphere of youth and madness,
I suffered once from all the madness
No one's, I swear by God! in sadness
poetic in her simple pureness,
with passion and with shrewd obliqueness
across our snows of northern bleakness
Nursed in the orient's languid weakness,
stalking the momentary weakness,
at a friend's word, a girl's caress.
the ladies' calculated dress;
by now he's driving home to dress.
Eugene's a pedant in his dress,
but Eugene's out from din and press:
shine out and bring the world to bliss. >2
(my tale's beginning here repeats);
Onegin spoke about its flights
in sighs and boredom and deceits
friends, foes, priests, guests, inured attendants
Lensky disliked the entertainments
and act the humble or imperious,
For goodness' sake, you can't be serious
the indifferent, or the deadly serious!
``At the Larins'!'' ``But how mysterious.
of useful objects that the curious
or for the modishly luxurious --

We must confess that taste deserts us

culture, so far from healing, hurts us;
as fate's mysterious purpose burrows,
reap a brief harvest on their furrows;
right from the cradle of her days;
that once I spent my happiest days?
such shadowy and leisured ways,
she blossomed in the graceful ways
adorning all its country ways.
and by the sound of silly joys.
the new ballet he should be at.
she'll spin this way and that, and beat
who on a deuce, that famous cheat,
and ruled him like an autocrat --

The World found this enough to treat
has never staked his family seat.
came driving to his country seat,
fire of the cutlets' scalding fat,
killing each evening off like that?''
so all went smoothly after that.
the gift of recognizing what
``You're wrong.'' ``But what I wonder at
to catch the eye and to attract.
They will receive us with delight.''
Tatyana'd rise by candlelight.
wakened at the same hour of night
``Gladly.'' ``So when?'' ``Why not tonight?

you loved the opulent contact
against each other swift, small feet.
are just as nimble as their feet.
of ladies' heads, and ladies' feet;
Eugene as clever, and quite sweet.
across the stage; he yawns: ``Ballet --
6 Vintage 1811, the year of the Comet.
on ballroom's looking-glass parquet
and watch your daughters closer yet,
shutters are opened and the soft
shall my sad gaze no more alight
in winter was her heart's delight.
again I see your soulful flight?
the stars, the moon -- celestial light
in the mazurka he was light,
solitude, stillness and the night,
outside and in they star the night;
to horror-stories told at night
a simple Russian family night:
in first place -- listen, am I right? --
still everywhere the lamps are bright;
repeats what her mama has taught.
it.
from day to day she could but wait;
or else... or else, may God forfend it!
You too, mamas, I pray attend it,
their looks and language in deceit

with cranium aching fit to split;
you're sure to find her portrait in it:
but it's the first time you'll have known it,
or languid bosoms; and no visit
of simple product supplements it.
a nation's wealth is, what augments it,
``Your modish world, I'll do without it;
and good and ill, and learning's fruit,
in his first dream of passion's fruit,
full of his usual pith and wit,
What of it? it's euphonious, pleasant,
5 The week before Lent.
he ended even your employment;
that's where my years of youth were spent.

18 ``The  author, on  his mother's  side,  is of  African  descent...''
of rugs, and carpets' rich refinement.
and fatherland and grim confinement?
his housekeeper and her department
to freedom, softness and enjoyment:
and in retreat from all enjoyment
and every day its own enjoyment?
its work, its torture, its enjoyment,
his young heyday's supreme employment,
But was it happy, his employment,
Was it not in such sweet employment
but where are all your evenings spent?''
3  ``Sweet-sounding Greek names like  Agathon... etc., are only current


and yet inseparably present,
``Goodbye, Onegin, time I went.''
there, where the coulisse entrance went,
what flowers of spring display your dint?
madman, can you forget their print?
our deep economist had got
and satisfied with what he'd got,
into a small quit-rent -- and got
made over to them his whole lot,
his serfs rejoicing at their lot.
``for reasons of censorship'' because, as Nabokov explains, ``tsars were not
of the Terpsichorean foot.
and cared not what his daughter kept
to all this tattle, yet at heart

by way of secret tome that slept
it lacked, of course, poetic heart,
the blood within my withered heart,
the wilful fancies of the heart.
At first, disparity of heart
one thing inspired his breath, his heart,
the uncertainties within his heart;
o fields -- to you I'm vowed at heart.
of hope sometimes disturbs my heart;
and fastens, like a term of art,
for him, the objective on life's chart
sharpness of wit, and social art,
once more the love, once more the smart...
in showing how to tell apart

and granite, were so far apart.
it would be painful to depart
despite herself, rehearsed the part:
and self-oblivion was his art!
the heart of the professional flirt!
or Russia's chondria, for short;
and to it, with a grave import,
how well he knew the way to hurt --
as well-read, though of pedant cast.

and when, by misty moon, the east
with sabre's slash, and bullet's blast.
yet he fell out of love at last
amusing, flattering with the best,
startling the ingenuous with a jest,
pen, tears, and rhymes, and all the rest?
smile, voice and movements, little waist --
13 French encyclopedist.
but never asked her husband first.
if her cross mood was at its worst --
for raking up historic dust
as horses whirled him through the dust.


his parents' patriarchal dust
by will of Zeus, the high and just,
or stirring annalistic must;
Alas! the generations must,
among the neighbours round about.
with lampions studded all about
glitters with hoar-frost all about.
something to rack his brains about,
suspecting wonders would come out.
``Make way, make way,'' goes up the shout;
to the Larins' had caused a spout
the sumptuous palais shines out;
all these are charming! but to put
of Richardson and of Rousseau.

``Well, I won't hold you up or bore you;
And now, my friends, I hear from you
Friendship, as I must own to you,
"When will the devil come for you?"''
You husbands, deeply I respect you!
I'm at your service to protect you;
secretly overheard by you.
over the Petersburg pavé --
that, like proud Byron, I can draw
ancestral1 portraits met the view
as by the shortest way they flew,
than most. Evgeny, though he knew
to us, though, not exactly new.


to hide a hope, to make a show
already yawned before the show,
neighbour was sure, from this would flow
must be my theme, if you'll allow.
until the dawn beneath her pillow.
Proud Albion's lyre is what I follow,
Onegin swiftly came to know
I only write like this, you know,
Reader, the elder sister now
a cheerful glimmer on the snow
and crisply crunch the morning snow.
twin lamps of serried coupés throw
her clever husband on the morrow
The better to dispel her sorrow
or on the granite of the bay.
sickroom attendance night and day
tomorrow just like yesterday.
he was a poet in his day.
I'd still like dances to this day:
Then, plunged in the housekeeper's day,
then liking grew, then every day
always monotonously gay,
or mother; and in all the play
before it was the golden play
struck for Evgeny, with its play
when little notes come on a tray.
at my famed portrait and will say:
Lensky had a curt word to say
who late at night are whirled away

to be mentioned in so offhand a way''.
I've wasted too much life away!
Beneath storm's vestment, on the seaway,
her grief, and nearly ran away.
looked on a river: far away
and never stir a foot away!
wanders in a distracted way
battling along that watery freeway,

and then sat silent all the way.

and he believed his friends were ready
to put on chains for him, and steady

his mind, in judgement still unsteady,
9 Actress in tragedy.
14 Pushkin leaves blank the name of Onegin's model dandy.
of children, though as young as they,
they met on horseback; quickly they
and how a country lives, and why
and there, beneath your noonday sky,
the expanse of fields, so wide, so lonely,
pronouncing through her nose politely
to sing of others must imply
it needs no gold if a supply
lacing her stays up very tightly;
the rosy bloom that glowed so newly
Onegin was assessed by many
(critical judges, strict as any)
reluctant to exhaust the boy,
``he dandled me as a small boy.
treated his lessons as a ploy.
How many times I made a toy
on features known, but to that dreary,
bored with hilarity, and weary,
before him roast beef, red and gory,
and leave no faint footprint of glory...
there Didelot10 crowned himself with glory:
and pâté, Strasbourg's deathless glory,
another's grin was sly and shifty,

once more Corneille's majestic story;
to high renown my doleful story,
where, in a cab, and furious hurry,
boredom has just as sure an entry,
Yes, spleen was waiting like a sentry,
for in our time, beyond dubiety,
But, did they not corrupt society,
But, in a fearful huff, his thrifty
drive there, and with formality
of old-lime hospitality.
the guests are feasted, good and hearty,
where shall he go, my rogue, my hearty?
is this -- one sees from here the party:
a ball here, there a children's party;
{77}
{58}
{63}
{84}
{57}
{51}
{40}

{62}
{82}
{53}
{75}
{87}
{70}
{68}
{45}
{56}
{78}
{81}
{80}
{64}
{46}
{85}
{54}
{67}
{60}
{73}
{83}
{69}
{79}
{48}
{39}
{52}
{65}
{47}

{61}
{44}
{55}
{59}
{76}
{71}
{43}
{50}
{42}
{66}
{72}
{74}
{49}
{86}
